---
title: The Other Problem with 23andMe
layout: post
tags: [science, policy]
---
23andMe, a genetic-testing startup based in Mountain View, has been making headlines in the past two weeks for their recent spat with the FDA. On November 22nd, the government ageny sent 23andMe a ["warning letter"](http://www.fda.gov/ICECI/EnforcementActions/WarningLetters/2013/ucm376296.htm) regarding the company's Personal Genome Service (PGS) kit, which uses SNP genotyping to assess risk for certain diseases and conditions. The FDA letter is centered around the lack of assurance and data from 23andMe on the efficacy and reliability of the PGS kit. They are concerned that the rate of false positives and negatives is too high, potentially leading PGS users to make decisions detrimental to their health. They give the following example:

> For instance, if the BRCA-related risk assessment for breast or ovarian cancer reports a false positive, it could lead a patient to undergo prophylactic surgery, chemoprevention, intensive screening, or other morbidity-inducing actions, while a false negative could result in a failure to recognize an actual risk that may exist. 

Lior Pachter, a UC Berkeley computational biologist, crunched some numbers and [found](http://liorpachter.wordpress.com/2013/11/30/23andme-genotypes-are-all-wrong/) that, despite the low error rate in individual SNPs \( < 0.01% \), the whole genotype is almost guaranteed to contain at least one error. Why is this a major problem? Consider how most customers would use their PGS results. They would scan for the most "interesting" SNPs without controlling for the false discovery rate. Pachter estimates that as many as 1/3 of all 23andMe genotypes contain errors in these "interesting" SNPs, leading the customers to false conclusions. Thus, the aforementioned individual SNP error rate is not nearly as important as the error rate in **any** medically significant SNP. Naturally, re-running each SNP call multiple times would decrease the error rate, but it would also drive up the cost, negating one of the key benefits of 23andMe's PGS kit.

**The criticisms levied by the FDA and by Pachter are compelling, but they both avoid the pressing privacy issues with personal genomic services.** 23andMe states in their [privacy policy](https://www.23andme.com/about/privacy/) that they do "not sell, lease, or rent your individual-level Personal Information without explicit consent." However, they reserved the right to make changes to their privacy policy. Especially worrisome are [comments](http://www.fastcompany.com/3018598/for-99-this-ceo-can-tell-you-what-might-kill-you-inside-23andme-founder-anne-wojcickis-dna-r) made by Patrick Chung, a 23andMe board member, that "the long game here is not to make money selling kits, although the kits are essential to get the base level data." He goes on to say, "Once you have the data, \[the company\] does actually become the Google of personalized health care." 

There is a fundamental difference between Google mining a small part of a customer's digital life and 23andMe's plan of mining a customer's mostly immutable genetic data. A corporate takeover, a security breach, or any other tech startup hazard is a much larger problem when dealing with customers' genomic information, especially since even anonymized genomic data can often be identified using publicly available [tools](http://www.sciencemag.org/content/339/6117/321). Such information is a potential gold-mine for marketers and pharmaceutical companies, but the cat can only be let out of the bag once. 

That said, I am a strong proponent of personal genomics and I am confident that it will revolutionize healthcare, but the privacy protections are simply not there yet. 